 
Content
1	Introduction	1
1.1	Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803	1
1.2	The primary energy metabolism in Synechocystis	3
1.2.1	Photosynthesis and respiration	5
1.2.2	Central carbon metabolism	11
1.3	Phytochrome signalling in plants and cyanobacteria	16
1.4	Histidine kinase signalling	20
1.4.1	Histidine kinase signalling in cyanobacteria	23
1.4.2	Cytokinin signalling in plants	24
1.5	Cytokinin function in plants	26
1.5.1	Occurrence and homeostasis	27
1.5.2	Cytokinin function in defense reactions	28
1.6	Objectives	29


 
1	Introduction 
For all living organisms it is critically important to adapt quickly and efficiently to changes in their physical and chemical environment. In bacteria, adaptational processes can occur at different levels, including the level of individual genes and proteins, via altered gene expression and allosteric regulation of enzyme activity, the whole-cell level via cellular motility and the multicellular level via cell aggregation and biofilm formation (Galperin, 2010). The ability to mediate these adaptive responses is conferred by sophisticated signal transduction systems, the so-called two-component signalling systems, which are found ubiquitously in prokaryotes and archae, fungi, yeast and certain plants and have been shown to regulate physiological and molecular processes at each level of adaptation (Galperin, 2010; Perry et al., 2010). Considerable effort has been made in the past years to elucidate these signal transduction processes and the functions of the associated proteins (Stock et al., 2000; Laub & Goulian, 2007; Schaller et al., 2008; Gao & Stock, 2009; Wuichet et al., 2010; Schaller et al., 2011). However, a thorough understanding of the complex networks remains elusive. Considering the involvement of signal transduction systems in essential processes and the concomitant far-ranging effects, it is of great importance to contribute to the understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. 
1.1	Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
Cyanobacteria are considered to be among the evolutionarily oldest organisms on earth since the discovery of 3.5 billion year old putative stromatolites and microfossils, attributed to cyanobacteria (Schopf, 1993). With their ability to perform oxygenic photosynthesis, cyanobacteria played a significant role in the history of earth and the evolution of life as primary producers of atmospheric oxygen (Nakao et al., 2010). Even today, those prokaryotic microorganisms contribute substantially in maintaining the biosphere, as they are important primary producers at a global scale with a relevant role in the carbon and nitrogen cycles (Herreiro & Flores, 2008). Considering their long evolutionary history, cyanobacteria are among the most successful groups of microorganisms on earth. One of the main reasons for their evolutionary success can be related to their adaptability to a broad range of environmental conditions, resulting in an almost ubiquitous distribution in marine and terrestrial ecosystems, ranging from fresh and salt water to even more extreme habitats such as thermal springs, alkaline lakes, glaciers and deserts (Van den Hoek et al., 1993; Whitton & Potts, 2000; Koksharova, 2009). 
According to the endosymbiont theory (Margulis, 1970), chloroplasts in plants and eukaryotic algae have evolved from cyanobacterial ancestors via endosymbiosis (Nakamura et al., 1999). Cyanobacteria and especially the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (order Chroococcales) have become important model organisms for research of photosynthesis, respiration, carbon metabolism and its regulation, as well as in signal transduction processes and stress responses. The capability of performing oxygenic photosynthesis with a complete gene set similar to higher plants (Nakamura et al, 1999) and the ability to survive and grow in a wide range of conditions, made Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (hereafter Synechocystis) into one of the most intensely studied cyanobacteria. 
The original Synechocystis strain was isolated from a freshwater lake and was deposited in the Pasteur Culture Collection (PCC) in 1968 (Rippka et al., 1979). In the early 1980s, the strain was recognised to be spontaneously transformable by integration of exogenous DNA into its genome via double homologous recombination (Griegorieva & Shestakov, 1982). Thus, their natural transformation competence can be used for analysing functions of unknown genes through gene disruption and insertion mutational analysis (Nakamura et al, 1999). 
In its natural habitat, Synechocystis grows photoautotrophically. Besides photoautotrophic growth, certain strains of Synechocystis are able to utilise organic compounds, e.g. glucose as a carbon source concomitant with photosynthetic CO2 fixation (Rippka et al., 1979; Stal & Moezelaar, 1997; Gomez-Baena et al., 2008). Hence, the glucose-tolerant wildtype strain of Synechocystis is capable of photoautotrophic and photomixotrophic growth under light conditions and of heterotrophic growth in darkness in glucose-supplemented media (Williams, 1988; Anderson & McIntosh, 1991). However, light irradiation is still required for heterotrophic growth, which occurs even with a low light intensity at which photosynthesis can scarcely proceed (Tabei et al., 2009) since Synechocystis cells are unable to grow in complete darkness. Occasional light pulses (e.g. for 5 min every 24 h) are sufficient to enable growth and survival of the cells in darkness. This phenomenon is referred to as light-activated heterotrophic growth/LAHG (Anderson & McIntosh, 1991). Hence, the ability to carry out heterotrophic growth without loss of viability made Synechocystis a useful model organism in photosynthesis research by enabling the disruption of photosynthesis-related genes to investigate functions and contributions to the photosynthetic pathway (Nakamura et al., 1999). The role as model organism became even more important after Synechocystis was the first photosynthetic organism to be completely sequenced (Kaneko et al., 1996). The availability of the entire genomic nucleotide sequence provides the possibility to study gene functions and regulatory mechanisms on a genome-wide level. To summarize, Synechocystis has become an extremely versatile model organism in research of signal transduction processes and stress responses, as well as in carbon metabolism and especially in oxygenic photosynthesis.
1.2	 The primary energy metabolism in Synechocystis 
The primary energy metabolism in cyanobacteria consists of anabolic and catabolic processes, including photosynthesis and CO2 fixation, glycogen formation and gluconeogenesis, as well as glucose degradation processes, including glycolysis, the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (OPPP) and the incomplete tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Cyanobacteria constitute a unique case where the anabolic and catabolic carbohydrate mechanisms function in the same compartment of the cell. This requires strict regulation of the direction of reactions in response to environmental conditions (Tabei et al., 2009). 
Light is one of the most important environmental factors for photosynthetic organisms. They use light energy to produce chemical energy and reducing power for the fixation of atmospheric carbon and the assimilation of other nutrients. Reduced carbon provides energy, as well as building blocks in metabolic reactions required for growth and development. In their natural habitat, cyanobacteria are exposed to changing light conditions, such as the diurnal light-dark cycle, as well as daily changes in light quality and quantity. In order to maintain their metabolic homeostasis, it is of critical importance to adapt to changing light conditions, either by switching between metabolic modes during the light-dark cycle or by using mechanisms to adjust the distribution of light energy for maximal energy utilisation and protection against photodamage. Changing light conditions can cause redox imbalance and an excessive production of damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS), when the perceived light is not fully utilized by downstream processes (Apel & Hirt, 2004; Scheibe et al., 2005). It has been suggested that photosynthetic organisms integrate nutrient-specific pathways by tightly connecting photosynthetic processes with other principal metabolic pathways to survive under constantly changing environmental and metabolic cues (Wang et al., 2003; Forchhammer 2004; Gutierrez et al., 2007). Furthermore, the tight connection between the activity of photosynthesic processes and metabolic pathways becomes also apparent as photosynthesis represents the sole source to generate chemical energy for photosynthetic organisms under photoautotrophic conditions (Singh et al., 2010). 
When light is available, cyanobacteria assimilate inorganic carbon via the Calvin cycle, using ATP and NADPH generated through photosynthesis. The fixed carbon enters the glycolytic pathway and can subsequently be utilized to generate reducing equivalents, cofactors and building blocks for biosynthetic pathways or it can be assimilated in the form of glycogen as reserve carbohydrate. Under non-photosynthetic conditions respiration releases the energy stored in those carbon compounds. Glucose residues, derived from glycogen, are catabolized via the OPPP, the lower energy-conserving phase of glycolysis and the TCA cycle, resulting in the production of NAD(P)H and biosynthetic intermediates for maintenance and growth (Stal & Moezelaar, 1997; Knowles & Plaxton, 2003; Singh & Sherman, 2005; Tabei et al., 2009). 
The following two sections will give a detailed overview on the primary metabolism and its concomitant processes, beginning with photosynthesis and respiration, followed by the central carbon metabolism. 
1.2.1	Photosynthesis and respiration
In cyanobacteria, both metabolic processes, oxygenic photosynthesis and aerobic respiration, are located in the same compartment (Schmetterer et al., 1994). Unlike in plants where photosynthesis and respiration are separated in different organelles, cyanobacteria possess, due to the lack of compartmentalization, a highly differentiated membrane system, which harbors the electron transport chains required for photosynthesis and respiration (Vermaas, 1994). This internal membrane system, the thylakoid membrane, which separates the cytoplasm from the lumen, contains a photosynthetic electron transport chain including the two photosystems (PS I and PS II) and a respiratory electron transport chain, including among others, NADPH type-1 dehydrogenase (NDH-1), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and a cytochrome aa3-type terminal oxidase (cytochrome c oxidase) (Tanaka et al., 1997; Cooley & Vermaas, 2000). Both electron transport chains in the thylakoid membrane intersect and have electron carriers in common, including the cytochrome b6f complex, the plastoquinone pool (PQ) and soluble redox active proteins (Schmetterer et al., 1994, Vermaas, 2001). In contrast, the cytoplasmatic membrane, which forms the inner boundary of the periplasmatic space, harbors solely components associated with the respiratory electron transport chain. Therefore, in most cyanobacteria, photosynthetic electron transport occurs solely in the thylakoids, whereas respiratory electron flow takes place in both, the thylakoid and the cytoplasmatic membrane systems (Vermaas, 2001).
Electron input in the transport system in cyanobacterial thylakoid membranes is a highly complex process due to the existence of converging metabolic pathways, feeding electrons into the system. Under light conditions, there is net input of electrons into the transport system from water-splitting activity of PS II (Campbell et al., 1998). Under light or dark conditions, variable electron fluxes from NAD(P)H, which is oxidized by one or more thylakoid-bound dehydrogenases (Scherer et al., 1982; Mi et al., 1992, 1995; Herbert et al., 1995; Tanaka et al., 1997) feed into the transport system (Campbell et al., 1998). In this complex electron transport network, three intersecting pathways have been found dominant in Synechocystis thylakoid membranes: linear photosynthetic electron transport from water to NADP+ via PS II and PS I, cyclic electron transport around PS I and respiratory transport from NADPH and succinate to cytochrome c oxidase (Cooley & Vermaas, 2001), which will be described in detail in the following section. 

 
Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the intersecting photosynthetic and respiratory electron transport pathways in the thylakoid membrane of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (modified after Campbell et al., 1998; Vermaas, 2001 and Singh et al., 2009)
Bolts designate light energy, starting the redox reactions in both photosystems. Arrows indicate photosynthetic and respiratory electron transfer reactions. Linear photosynthetic electron transport: from water to NADP+ via PS II and PS I (thick solid arrows); respiratory electron transport: from NADPH and succinate to cytochrome c oxidase (dotted arrows) and cyclic electron transport: around PS I via Fd and/or NDH (not indicated). Dashed arrows indicate protons released into the lumen, thereby establishing a proton gradient (ΔpH) across the thylakoid membrane, which powers ATP synthase. 
Abbreviations: NDH-1, type I NADPH dehydrogenase; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; PS I and II; photosystem I and II; P680, P700, reaction center chlorophyll molecules of PS II and I, respectively; PQ/PQH2, plastoquinone pool; cyt b6f, cytochrome b6f complex; PC, plastocyanin; cyt oxidase, cytochrome aa3-type cytochrome c oxidase; ATPase, ATP synthase complex; NADP(H), nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced form); PBS, phycobilisome; PC, phycocyanin; AP, allophycocyanin; hv, photons; Fdox/Fdred, ferredoxin in oxidized and reduced forms, respectively; OPP Pathway, oxidative pentosephosphate pathway; RPP Pathway, reductive pentose phosphate pathway.
Photosynthetic electron transport 
Photosynthetic light reactions establish an electron flow in the thylakoid membranes, comprising of linear and cyclic electron transport, which leads to the production of NADPH and ATP used for carbon fixation (Iwai et al., 2010). The primary reactions of oxygenic photosynthesis are catalysed by two large protein complexes, PS II and I, that act in series to drive light-dependent electron transfer reactions (Pakrasi, 1995; Singh et al., 2009). The photosynthetic reaction is initiated by the absorption of light, captured by specialized antennae structures. These antennae transfer the excitation energy to specialized chlorophyll molecules (P680 and P700), the reaction centers in both photosystems, which in turn catalyse light-induced electron transfer across the thylakoid membrane (Pakrasi, 1995).
In cyanobacteria, the prevalent antenna pigments for the absorbtion of light energy are chlorophyll (Chl) and bilin (Glazer, 1977; MacColl, 1998). Chls are mainly associated with PS I and absorb light with maximum absorbance wavelengths (λmax) of 435 and 680 nm, while bilins are covalently attached to light-harvesting proteins, the phycobiliproteins and are mainly associated with PS II (Singh et al., 2009). The specific combination of apoproteins and bilins in a phycobilisome (PBS) determines its light absorption profile. The two main phycobiliproteins in cyanobacterial PBS are the red light-absorbing allophycocyanin (AP) with λmax ~ 650 nm and phycocyanin (PC) with λmax ~ 620 nm (Singh et al., 2009). Structurally, APs, together with their specific linker polypeptides, form the “core” of a PBS, whereas PCs (sometimes also phycoerythrins and other phycobiliproteins) together with their associated linker polypeptides represent the “rod” elements, radiating out from the core. PBS are mobile light-harvesting complexes that are located peripheral to the thylakoid membrane (Grossmann et al., 1993; MacColl, 1998) and transfer energy directly to the PS (Mullineaux, 2008). After absorption of excitation energy via the light-harvesting complexes, the photochemical reaction starts with the transfer of the excitation energy to the reaction center molecules of the photosystems. During linear electron transport, PS II catalyses the light-driven oxidation of water and the reduction of plastoquinone (PQ). In each charge separation event, one electron is extracted from the Mn-containing oxygen-evolving complex. After accumulation of 4 positive charges, oxygen is evolved and 4 H+ are released into the lumen of the thylakoids. The electron is transferred from P680* across the membrane by a chain of electron carriers to plastoquinone (PQ). After two charge separation events, PQ is doubly reduced, takes up two protons from the cytoplasm and leaves PS II as PQH2. PQH2 diffuses through the membrane to the cytochrome b6f complex, which reduces a soluble electron carrier in the thylakoid. This electron carrier can either be plastocyanin (PC) or cytochrome c553 (cyt c553), depending on the species and the availability of copper, as plastocyanin is a copper-containing enzyme (Vermaas, 2001). The two protons of PQH2 are released into the lumen and two additional protons are pumped across the membrane by the cyt b6f complex. The reduced PC translocates from the cyt b6f complex to PS I. Light energy, captured by the antenna system of PSI, is transferred to the reaction center of the complex. When the excitation energy reaches P700, P700* is formed. An electron is ejected and transferred across the membrane to the final acceptor ferredoxin (Fd) at the cytoplasmatic side of the PS I complex. The reduced ferredoxin is subsequently used for NADPH production, which provides the reducing power for the conversion of carbon dioxide to organic molecules via the Calvin cycle. 
During linear photosynthetic electron transfer, protons are released into the lumen upon water splitting at PS II and plastoquinol oxidation by the cytochrome b6f complex, thereby establishing a proton gradient (ΔpH) across the thylakoid membrane. This ΔpH is used for ATP generation by powering the membrane-bound ATP-synthase. Besides the ΔpH established by linear electron transport, an alternate pathway, the cyclic electron transport, contributes to the ΔpH. This electron transport is driven solely by PS I (Fork & Herbert, 1993; Bendall & Manasse, 1995; Munekage & Shikanai, 2005) and allows the generation of ATP without the accumulation of reduced species (Singh et al., 2009). Cyclic electron transport describes electron flows around PS I, from PS I via ferredoxin and/or NAD(P)H (Herbert et al., 1995; Mi et al., 1995) directly back to the intersystem transport chain (Campbell et al., 1998). Two possible electron transport pathways have been proposed for cyclic electron transport, an Fd-dependent pathway and an NDH-dependent pathway (Shikanai, 2007). In the NDH-dependent pathway, NDH mediates NADPH oxidation and PQ pool reduction similar to complex I in mitochondria (Okhawa et al., 2000), while it remains elusive how electrons on Fd are transferred to the PQ pool in the Fd-dependent cyclic electron transport (Iwai et al., 2010). Hence, linear photosynthetic electron transport leads to NADPH and ATP production and to the generation of a ΔpH across the thylakoid membranes, whereas cyclic electron flow results only in establishing a ΔpH, which is subsequently used for ATP generation (Tsunoyama et al., 2009). 
Depending on environmental or physiological conditions, the ratio between ATP and NADPH can be adjusted by fine-tuning the ratio of cyclic and linear electron transport (Tsunoyama et al., 2009). Furthermore, cyclic/linear electron transport ratio adjustments support a redox poise of the PQ pool, which is essential for maximal light energy utilisation and protection against photodamage or other types of stress (Fork & Herbert, 1993; Bukhov & Carpentier, 2004; Munekage et al., 2004; Joliot & Joliot, 2006; Shikanai, 2007; Rumeau et al., 2007). For example, changes in the spectral composition of light can lead to imbalanced excitation of the photosystems, which in turn leads to reduced photosynthetic efficiency and damages the photosynthetic apparatus (Anderson et al., 1995; Dietzel et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2009). In order to cope with such imbalances and to ensure efficient photosynthesis, cyanobacteria, algae and plants have developed adaptation mechanisms, that act on different time-scales, the so-called short-term and long-term mechanisms (Manodori & Melis, 1986; Chow et al., 1990; Anderson et al., 1995; Fujita, 1997; Allen, 2003; Dietzel et al., 2008). Within the range of seconds to minutes, a short-term mechanism, known as state transition, controls the distribution of excitation energy transfer between the two photosystems (Bonaventura & Myers, 1969; Murata, 1969). Accordingly, two states, state I and state II, have been defined, in which the photosynthetic apparatus gives an optimal quantum yield of photosynthesis in light, having a composition favoring its absorption by PS I or PS II, respectively (Allen, 2003; Wollmann, 2001). In cells adapted to state I, PBS transfer energy primarily to PS II (Mullineaux, 2008), resulting in a predominance of the linear electron transport. In cells adapted to state II a significant proportion of PBS transfer energy to PS I instead (van Thor et al., 1998; McConnell et al., 2002; Mullineaux, 2008), thereby resulting in a predominance of cyclic electron transport. In contrast to higher plants and green algae, cyanobacteria are in state I upon illumination and in state II in the dark or in very low light due to the respiratory electron flow reducing the PQ pool (Mullineaux & Allen, 1986; Mao et al., 2002; Tsunoyama et al., 2009). State transitions are triggered by the redox state of the PQ pool or a closely located electron carrier (Mullineaux, 2008). Hence, they allow the regulation of light-harvesting in response to the photosynthetic electron transport chain (Mullineaux & Allen, 1990; Mullineaux, 2008). State transitions require PBS diffusion (Joshua & Mullineaux, 2004) and are assumed to be involved in covalent modification of PBS, thereby changing their binding properties for PS II or PS I (Allen et al., 1985). Nevertheless, the signal transduction pathway that connects a change in PQ redox state to a change in the binding properties of PBS remains elusive (Mullineaux, 2008).
During prolonged changes in light quality, cyanobacteria utilize long-term mechanisms that occur within hours and days to circumvent reduced photosynthetic efficiency and to protect cells from photodamage. In contrast to the antenna movement during state transitions, the long-term mechanism requires the adjustment of the photosystem stoichiometry to regulate the balance of electron flow between two reaction centers (Chow et al., 1990; Anderson et al., 1995; Dietzel et al., 2008). Hence, cyanobacteria cope with changing light quality by modulating the composition, structure and functions of the photosynthetic apparatus, thereby ensuring an effective balance of electron transfer rates between the two photosystems (Singh et al., 2009). 
Respiratory electron transport
Electron input into the transport system in the cyanobacterial thylakoid membrane either results from photosynthetic activity or from catabolic pathways providing the respiratory substrates in the absence of light. In the respiratory pathway, electrons from NAD(P)H and succinate enter the electron transport chain via NADPH dehydrogenase (NDH) (Mi et al., 1992; Ryu et al., 2003) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) (Cooley & Vermaas, 2001). Despite many studies of the respiratory electron transport pathways in cyanobacterial thylakoid membranes, there still remains controversy about whether SDH, rather than NDH, is the major pathway of electron flow into the PQ pool (Mi et al., 1995; Cooley & Vermaas, 2000; Ryu et al., 2003). Besides its function as electron acceptor, the PQ pool serves also as electron donor for the respiratory oxidases. These function as terminal components of the respiratory electron transport chain, where the electrons are finally transferred to molecular oxygen. Electrons are either transferred directly to a cytochrome bd-type oxidase or via plastocyanin/cyt553 to a cytochrome aa3-type cytochrome c oxidase (CtaI) whereas cytochrome aa3-type cytochrome c oxidase functions as the main oxidase for the NADPH-driven electron transport in the thylakoid membrane (Berry et al., 2002). This electron transport establishes a ΔpH across the thylakoid membrane, which is subsequently utilized for ATP generation through ATP-synthase. 
1.2.2	Central carbon metabolism
Besides nitrogen, sulphur and phosphorus, reduced carbon is an essential macronutrient required for growth and development of all organisms. Photosynthetic organisms produce reduced carbon through photosynthesis by using the light energy to generate chemical energy and reducing power for the fixation of atmospheric carbon and assimilation of other nutrients (Singh et al., 2008). Under non-photosynthetic conditions, they must resort to heterotrophic dark energy generation, which includes the degradation of stored carbon compounds via the OPPP, the lower energy-conserving phase of glycolysis and the TCA cycle (Stal & Moezelaar, 1997; Knowles & Plaxton, 2003). Figure 2 presents a schematic overview of these metabolic pathways and their involvement in formation and degradation of carbohydrates. 
 
Figure 2: Schematic metabolic map of the central carbon metabolism in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, including the Calvin cycle, glycolysis, the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway and the (incomplete) tricarboxylic acid cycle (modified after Yang et al., 2002).
Abbreviations: G1P, glucose-1-phosphate; G6P, glucose-6-phosphate; G6PGL, 6-phosphogluconolactone; 6PGL, 6-phosphogluconolactone; 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; Rib5P, ribulose-5-phosphate; R5P, ribose-5-phosphate; S7P, sedoheptulose-7-phosphate; X5P, xylulose-5-phosphate; E4P, erythrose-4-phosphate; Rib1,5P2, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate; F6P, fructose-6-phosphate; F1,6P2, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone-phosphate; G1,3P2, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate; G3P, 3-phosphoglycerate; G2P, 2-phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; ACA, acetyl-CoA; ICI, isocitrate; αKG, α-ketoglutarate; SUC, succinate; FUM, fumarate; MAL, malate, OAA, oxalacetate; G6PDH, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; Enzymes (italic, grey font): 6PGDH, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase; GK, glucokinase; PGI, phosphoglucose isomerase; PFK, phosphofructokinase. 

Photosynthetic light reactions provide energy in the form of ATP and NADPH, which is subsequently used for carbon fixation in the Calvin cycle and also in the production of hexosephosphates via gluconeogenesis. The first step of the Calvin cycle, the carboxylation of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (Rib1,5P2), is catalysed by the enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco). Due to the relatively low affinity of Rubisco for its substrate, Synechocystis utilises a CO2-concentrating mechanism (CCM) that is upregulated when the cells are exposed to a limiting CO2 level and results in an increase of the CO2 concentration in close proximity to Rubisco within the carboxysomes (Kaplan and Reinhold, 1999; Giordano et al., 2005; Badger et al., 2006). The resulting sugar products enter the glycolytic pathway and are subsequently utilised in many biosynthetic pathways or converted into glycogen, the main reserve carbohydrate storage in cyanobacteria (Preiss & Sivak, 1998a, 1998b; Sivak & Preiss, 1998), which serves as metabolic energy source under non-photosynthetic conditions/during periods of darkness. The degradation of glycogen provides glucose, which is catabolised via the lower energy-conserving phase of glycolysis, an incomplete TCA cycle and the OPPP (Stal & Moezelaar, 1997). 
In the glycolytic pathway glucose is converted into pyruvate by generating small amounts of ATP and reducing power in the form of NADH. Glycolysis is a central pathway that produces important precursor metabolites, such as the six-carbon compounds glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), fructose-6-phosphate (F6P) and three-carbon compounds of glyceraldehyde-3P (GAP), 1,3-bisphospho-glycerate (G1,3P2), 3-phosphoglycerate (G3P), phosphoenol-pyruvate (PEP) and pyruvate. The oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate produces acetyl-CoA (ACA), the activated form of acetate, which is the starting molecule of the TCA cycle. The two-carbon acetyl group in ACA is transferred to the four-carbon compound of oxalacetate (OAA) to form the six-carbon compound of citrate. In a series of reactions two carbons in citrate are oxidized to CO2 and the reaction pathway supplies NADH for the use in the oxidative phosphorylation and other metabolic processes. At the end of the cycle the remaining four-carbon part is transformed back to OAA. The TCA cycle is an important pathway for the final steps of carbohydrate oxidation and also supplies important precursor metabolites including 2-oxoglutarate. In cyanobacteria, the TCA cycle was assumed to be non-functional due to the absence of the key enzyme 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (Pearce et al., 1969; Stanier & Cohen-Bazire, 1977). This was further supported by sequence analyses, which revealed that no genes, resembling those coding for a traditional 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, were present in the genome of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Vermaas, 2001). However, also in absence of a 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, Synechocystis is able to convert 2-oxoglutarate to succinate, indicating the use of an alternate pathway (Cooley et al., 2000; Vermaas, 2001).
In the OPPP, glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) is first converted to 6-phosphogluconolactone (6PGL) catalysed by the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) and further catabolised to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP). The catabolic processes of the OPPP provide reducing power in the form of NADPH and also metabolic precursors for anabolic processes, such as the biosynthesis of amino acids or nucleic acids (Kruger & von Schaewen, 2003; Osanai et al., 2007). The OPPP is widely accepted to be the main route of glucose catabolism in cyanobacteria, both for the breakdown of glycogen or exogenously supplied glucose (Hagen & Meeks, 2001; Yang et al., 2002). Hence, the enzyme G6PDH (encoded by zwf, slr1843) is of particular importance, as it catalyses the initial step of glucose degradation, thereby controlling the carbon flow into the OPPP. The regulation of G6PDH is complex and still not fully understood. The activity of G6PDH is directly influenced by the ratio of NADPH to NADP+ (Plaxton & Podesta, 2006; Lee et al., 2007), primarily through inhibition by NADP+, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (Schaeffer & Stanier, 1978) and light via thioredoxin (Buchanan, 1980; Crawford et al., 1984; Anderson & McIntosh, 1991). Thioredoxin was assumed to reductively inactivate G6PDH in the light and to oxidatively reactivate the enzyme in the dark, in order to prevent simultaneous operation of Calvin cycle and OPPP (Buchanan, 1980; Udvardy et al., 1984; Gleason, 1996; Hagen & Meeks, 2001). Biochemical analyses indicated that G6PDH exists in various aggregation states that show different kinetic properties (Schaeffer & Stanier, 1978; Gleason, 1996; Sundaram et al., 1998; Kahlon et al., 2006), however, the biological significance of the aggregation states is still unclear. Furthermore, a role in regulating G6PDH activity has been suggested for OpcA (OPP cycle protein A), as this protein is assumed to be involved in the assembly of G6PDH, its oligomerization and activation in various cyanobacteria (Sundaram et al., 1998; Min & Golden, 2000; Kahlon et al., 2006). 
Variations in the ability of cyanobacteria to consume carbon from their surroundings have been reported. In addition to photoautotrophic growth, where carbon dioxide represents the sole carbon source, some species are also capable of photomixotrophic and heterotrophic growth by utilizing exogenous organic carbon (Rippka et al., 1979; Stal & Moezelaar, 1997). Despite its importance to our understanding of cell metabolism, the mechanisms how cyanobacteria respond to the presence of glucose in their environment still remain unclear. Only small numbers of corresponding regulators have been identified in cyanobacteria. In Synechocystis, several sensors have been identified that are involved in glucose-induced signalling of several glycolytic and OPPP genes under photoautotrophic, photomixotrophic and heterotrophic growth conditions (Lee et al., 2007). Among those sensors, the histidine kinase 8 (Hik8) has been reported to play an important role in glucose metabolism in Synechocystis (Singh & Sherman, 2005). Hik8 has significant protein sequence similarity to SasA from Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942, a protein that interacts with KaiC (Iwasaki et al., 2000). KaiC, together with KaiA and KaiB, is involved in the circadian control in Synechococcus (Golden & Canales, 2003). Hik8 was found to enable cells to grow under heterotrophic growth conditions, probably via transcriptional regulation of gap1, which encodes one of the two glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenases catalysing the catabolic reaction (Singh & Sherman, 2005; Lee et al., 2007). Furthermore, it has been reported that the histidine kinase 31 (Hik31) is involved in the regulation of glucose catabolism in Synechocystis, either via transcriptional regulation of the icfG gene, which encodes a protein serine phosphatase (Shi et al., 1999) or by modulation of glukokinase activity (Kahlon et al., 2006). Besides two-component signalling regulatory proteins, sigma factors represent another group of important regulators determining transcript profiles by directly interacting with the promotor sequence (Paget & Helmann, 2003). Among the nine sigma factors existing in Synechocystis, SigE has been reported to positively regulate the expression of sugar catabolic genes (Lee et al., 2007). The analysis of circadian gene expression revealed that transcript levels of sigE peak at the end of the day, which indicates that sigE is under the control of the circadian oscillation and hence under the control of Hik8 circadian regulation in order to control sugar catabolic gene expression (Osanai et al., 2007). 
1.3	Phytochrome signalling in plants and cyanobacteria
Light is an important environmental factor for all photosynthetic organisms. Not only does it provide the radiant energy for photosynthesis and hence for growth and metabolism, but also the sensory information for adaptive and developmental processes. Accordingly, photosynthetic organisms possess various photosensors, enabling them to perceive environmental light signals and to respond by regulating the gene expression through signal transduction pathways (Quail, 1994). One such group of photosensors is the red/far-red sensitive phytochrome family. Phytochromes were first discovered in higher plants in the 1950s (Butler et al., 1959), based on the ability to measure the ratio of red light (R) and far-red light (FR) to control plant morphogenesis (Quail, 2002; Smith, 2000). Although originally thought to be restricted to plants, similar genes have been found more recently in several cyanobacteria (Hughes et al., 1997; Yeh et al., 1997; Wu & Lagarias, 2000; Park et al., 2000), in photosynthetic bacteria (Jiang et al., 1999; Bhoo et al., 2001) and even in nonphotosynthetic eubacteria and fungi (Davis et al., 1999; Lamparter et al., 2002; Montgomery & Lagarias, 2002; Karniol & Vierstra; 2003). 
Signalling as mediated by most phytochromes involves absorption of R light (650-660 nm) and FR light (700-730 nm), which leads to two stable conformations Pr and Pfr, respectively (Figure 3 A) (Smith et al., 1994; Quail et al., 1995). In most phytochromes, the photoproduct is metastable and can slowly return to the thermally stable dark state in the so-called dark reversion process (Rockwell & Lagarias, 2010). Figure 3 B displays the absorption spectra of Pfr and Pr and their partial overlap. Light establishes an equilibrium between Pfr and Pr that reflects environmental light conditions. Changes in the ratio between Pfr and Pr lead to changes in the equilibrium, therefore making phytochromes useful as sensors of critical changes in light quality (Sharrock et al., 2008). The ability to absorb light is conferred to the phytochrome by a covalently attached tetrapyrrole (bilin) chromophore, which typically absorbs light at about 665 nm (Quail, 1997; Fankhauser, 2001). This bilin chromophore, produced by the oxidative cleavage of heme, differs slight among various organisms (Rockwell et al., 2006), ranging from phytochromobilin utilized by plant phytochromes to phytocyanobilins in cyanobacteria (Yeh et al., 1997; Hughes et al., 1997) and biliverdin, which is used by eubacterial and fungal phytochromes (Rockwell & Lagarias, 2010). The chromophore is bound autocatalytically to a conserved cysteine within the cGMP phospho-diesterase/adenylcyclase/FhlA (GAF) domain of the photosensory unit of the apoprotein. Upon light absorption, the chromophore undergoes a conformational change comprising of a Z/E photoisomerization (Rockwell et al., 2009). The conformational change of the chromophor triggers a subsequent conformational change in the protein, which initiates a signal transduction cascade (Quail, 1997; Fankhauser, 2001). Thus, by interconverting between the two photochemically distinct forms, phytochromes act as Pr/Pfr-regulated photosensory switches in various controlling processes, ranging from phototaxis, re-setting of the circadian clock, chromatic adaptation and pigmentation in cyanobacteria to seed germination, photomorphogenesis, shade avoidance and flowering time in higher plants (Ulijasz et al., 2009). 
 
Figure 3: Overview of phytochrome properties and domain structures.
Phytochromes exist in two photointerconvertible forms, Pr and Pfr. (B) Absorption spectra of Pr and Pfr (modified after Elich & Chory, 1997). (C) Schematic representation of phytochrome domain organization in plants (e.g. AtPHYA) and in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis (SynCph1 and SynCph2) (modified after Nagatani, 2010; Anders et al., 2011). The chromophore is covalently linked to a conserved cysteine residue (denoted C) in the GAF domain. 
Abbreviations: aa, amino acids; NTE, N-terminal extension domain; GAF, domain present in vertebrate cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases, in cyanobacterial adenylate cyclases and in the formate lyase transcription activator FhlA; PHY, phytochrome-associated domain; PAS, domain found in family members including the period clock (PER) protein, the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and the single minded (SIM) of Drosophila; HKRD, histidine kinase-related domain; HKD, histidine kinase domain; GGDEF and EAL, domains with conserved sequence motifs, Gly-Gly-Asp-Glu-Phe and Glu-Ala-Leu, respectively, both domains are involved in turnover of c-di-GMP.

Phytochromes are encoded by multigene families (Elich & Chory, 1997). In Arabidopsis thaliana, the most thoroughly investigated plant system, the phytochrome family consists of five members, designated PHYA to E (Matthews & Sharrock, 1997), which fall into two classes: light-labile (PHY A) and light-stable (PHY B-E) phytochromes (Furuya, 1993). The first prokaryotic genes encoding phytochrome-like proteins have been detected in cyanobacteria (Kehoe & Grossmann, 1996; Wilde et al., 1997). The chromosome of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 contains a number of open reading frames exhibiting different degrees of similarity to plant genes encoding putative phytochrome-like proteins (Kaneko et al., 1996). These proteins contain one or several putative chromophore binding domains fused to various signaltransmitting domains, but the red/far red photoconversion of a covalently attached bilin chromophore that is typical of plant phytochromes has been shown only for two Synechocystis proteins: Cph1 (Hughes et al., 1997; Yeh et al., 1997; Hübschmann et al., 2001) and Cph2 (Wu & Lagarias, 2000; Park et al., 2000).
The domain architecture of phytochromes (Figure 3 C) implies conserved sequences and domains that are either ubiquitous among phytochromes or conserved in different subfamilies (Rockwell et al., 2009). Plant phytochromes, the cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph1 and most bacterial phytochromes (BphPs) share a common architecture consisting of an N-terminal photosensory region with three conserved PAS (PER/ARNT/SIM), GAF (cGMP phosphodiesterase adenylate cyclase/FhlA) and PHY (phytochrome-associated) domains and a C-terminal regulatory histidine kinase or histidine kinase-related domain (HKRD) (Quail, 1997). Histidine kinases are involved in signal transduction in prokaryotes and eukaryotes and are best studied as the sensor of the two-component systems of signal transduction that are widely distributed among bacteria (Wilde et al., 2002). Light-regulated protein kinase activity was first reported for the cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph1 from Synechocystis (Yeh et al., 1997). Cph1 was shown to be a true phytochrome by analysing recombinant Cph1 apoprotein from Escherichia coli (Hughes et al., 1997; Yeh et al., 1997; Lamparter et al., 1997) as well as the native holoprotein isolated from Synechocystis (Hübschmann et al., 2001). Once assembled with the chromophore, Cph1 was shown to undergo classic red/far-red reversibility in vitro (Hughes et al., 1997; Yeh et al., 1997). Moreover, Cph1 was found to autophosphorylate at a histidine kinase residue and to transfer the phosphate to the downstream response regulator Rcp1 (Yeh et al., 1997).
In earlier studies it has been proposed that plant phytochromes also act as light-regulated histidine kinases, based on limited sequence similarity of their C-termini to the histidine kinase domain present in bacterial two-component histidine kinases (Schneider-Poetsch, 1992; Yeh et al., 1997; Karniol et al., 2005). However, the histidine kinase-related sequence of plant phytochromes lacks several important residues characteristic for two-component histidine kinases, indicating that plant phytochromes work by an alternative mechanism. More recently, plant phytochromes were shown to be light-regulated serine/threonine kinases (Yeh & Lagarias, 1998).
In contrast to Cph1, the second cyanobacterial phytochrome Cph2 lacks a histidine kinase domain in the C-terminal module and has a different domain organization. In addition to the two N-terminal GAF domains (GAF1 and GAF2), which form the Pr/Pfr-reversible photosensory module, Cph2 possesses a third C-terminal GAF domain (GAF3). GAF1 and GAF3 both contain bilin-binding sites, cysteine-129 and cysteine-1022, respectively (Park et al., 2000), which have been shown capable of ligating bilin chromophores autocatalytically (Wu & Lagarias, 2000). Spectroscopic analyses of bilin attachment to the recombinant N-terminal GAF domain showed the typical red/far-red reversibility, while the phycocyanobilin adduct of the recombinant C-terminal part absorbed blue light stronger than red light (Wu & Lagarias, 2000; Moon et al., 2011). Furthermore, GAF3 shows homology to phytochrome-like proteins, the cyanobacteriochromes, which are known to absorb blue light (Ikeuchi & Ishizuka, 2008; Ulijasz et al., 2009). Thus, this leads to the assumption that Cph2 additionally acts as a blue light receptor (Wilde et al., 2002; Fiedler et al., 2005). In Cph2, the two N-terminal GAF domains, which form the photosensory module are followed by a GGDEF and an EAL domain. GGDEF and EAL domains are known to be involved in regulating intracellular levels of bis-(3’-5’)-cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate (c-di-GMP), a second messenger that is known to regulate motility and biofilm formation in bacteria (Römling et al., 2005; Jenal & Malone, 2006; Cotter & Stibitz, 2007; Yan & Chen, 2010). The cellular c-di-GMP concentration is regulated by GGDEF domains acting as c-di-GMP cyclases to increase the cellular c-di-GMP concentration and by EAL domains, acting as phosphodiesterases to decrease c-di-GMP content (Yan & Chen, 2010; Anders et al., 2011). 
Furthermore, Synechocystis cells display a flagellar-independent “twitching” or gliding motility that allows bacteria to move over moist surfaces with type IV pili (Bhaya et al., 1999; Fiedler et al., 2005). Interestingly, it has been reported on the photomovement that Cph2 controls phototaxis by inhibiting positive phototaxis towards blue light (Wilde et al., 2002; Fiedler et al., 2005; Moon et al., 2011).
1.4	Histidine kinase signalling 
Acclimation to fluctuations in environmental conditions is critically important for the survival of all living organisms. Adaptational processes require the ability to perceive changes in their physical and/or chemical environment and to respond by regulating the gene expression and protein synthesis appropriately. In particular unicellular organisms are routinely challenged by dramatic changes in their extracellular environment, which makes adaptive responses to altered conditions indispensable for successful competition and survival. The ability to mediate these adaptive responses is conferred by sophisticated signal transduction systems, which represent a fundamental strategy for information processing in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Signal-induced protein phosphorylation is a common regulatory mechanism to transduce intracellular or extracellular signals in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Kakimoto, 2003). In eukaryotes, regulatory protein phosphorylation predominantly occurs at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues (Hunter 1995; Hunter & Plowman, 1997; Plowman et al., 1999), while bacteria commonly use phosphotransfer pathways, referred to as ‘two-component’ systems that rely upon phosphorylation of histidine and aspartic residues (Mizuno, 1997; Schaller et al., 2008). However, both phosphorylation schemes (His→Asp and Ser/Thr/Tyr) can function in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, as His→Asp phosphotransfer systems have been found in several eukaryotic organisms (Wurgler & Murphy, 1997; Chang & Stewart, 1998; Loomis et al., 1997, 1998) and Ser/Thr and Tyr kinases and phosphatases have been identified in bacteria (Zhang et al., 1996). 
The core of two-component signalling pathways is a phosphotransfer reaction between two conserved components, a histidine kinase (Hik) and a cognate response regulator (RR) (Stock et al., 1995; 2000; Gao & Stock, 2009). The Hik is typically the input component of the pathway, which senses stimuli and correspondingly regulates the signalling pathway, while the RR represents the output component of the system, which is regulated by the Hik and finally affects the cellular response (Gao & Stock, 2009). Structurally, Hiks are generally homodimeric integral membrane proteins with a N-terminal signal-sensing (input) domain, which is located in the extracellular space and a C-terminal cytoplasmatic signal-transducing (transmitter) domain (Stock, 1999; Kakimoto, 2003). Signalling is initiated upon ligand binding to the histidine kinase sensory component. Most frequently, the signal is sensed by an extracellular loop formed between two membrane-spanning regions (Gao & Stock, 2009). However, depending on the corresponding signal, the sensor domains of some Hiks can also be located within the membrane or completely within the cytoplasm (Gao & Stock, 2009). Upon ligand-binding, the C-terminal kinase domain is activated, which is followed by autophosphorylation at a specific histidine residue (the H-box) using ATP as phosphate donor (Stock & Da, 2000). 
In prototypical Hiks, the cytoplasmatic kinase core consists of two distinct domains: a well-conserved C-terminal catalytic and ATP-binding domain and a less-conserved dimerization and histidine phosphotransfer domain (Gao & Stock, 2009). Several characteristic sequence motifs are conserved across the kinase core domains in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic Hiks (Stock et al., 1989; Parkinson & Kofoid, 1992; Alex & Simon, 1994). On the basis of specific sequences, they are referred to as H, N, G1, F and G2 boxes, with the H-box containing the phosphorylation site in the dimerization domain and the nucleotide binding pocket in N, G1, F and G2 boxes, located in the catalytic domain (Gao & Stock, 2009). After autophosphorylation of the Hik at its His residue, a high-energy phosphoryl group is created that is transferred from the Hik to an aspartate residue in the conserved receiver domain of the cognate RR. This phosphorylation event leads to a conformational change that activates an attached output domain of the RR, which triggers the cellular response. Response regulatory proteins possess various outputs, which include transcriptional, post-transcriptional, post-translational controls and protein-protein interactions (Perry et al., 2011). Most frequently, output domains are DNA-binding domains so that phosphorylation of the RR is coupled directly to changes in transcription (Laub & Goulian, 2007). However, many other output domains have enzymatic activities, for example the regulation of the c-di-GMP concentration (Hengge, 2009), while other RRs even lack a distinct output domain concomitant with their regulatory function residing within the receiver domain (Ulrich & Zhulin, 2009). One of those RRs is the chemotaxis protein CheY, which controls the rotational direction of the bacterial flagellar motor (Wadhams & Armitage, 2004).
Besides the typical two-component pathway, involving a single HK and a single RR that participate in an onestep His→Asp phosphotransfer, more complex variants exist. These so-called multistep phosphorelays involve multiple His-containing and Asp-containing domains and a multistep His→Asp→His→Asp phosphotransfer (Appleby et al., 1996). In many cases, Hiks are bifunctional and can catalyze both the phosphorylation and dephosphory-lation of their cognate RR (Keener & Kustu, 1988; Aiba et al., 1989; Lois et al., 1993). For bifunctional Hiks, input stimuli can regulate either the kinase or phosphatase activity (Laub & Goulian, 2007). These phosphorelays are usually initiated by a hybrid histidine kinase that autophosphorylates and transfers its phosphoryl group intramolecularly to an RR-like receiver domain. The phosphoryl group is then transferred to a signalling intermediate, a histidine phosphotransfer (HP) protein. HP domains can often be found fused to hybrid histidine kinases or as independent proteins that facilitate the phosphotransfer process (Appleby et al., 1996; Stock et al., 2000). Due to their ability to both receive and transmit phosphoryl groups, HP proteins subsequently transfer them to the receiver domains of a terminal RR, which can induce the corresponding response (Kato et al., 1997; Laub & Goulian, 2007). Phosphotransfer pathways are the most common pathway architecture in prokaryotes, while phosphorelays, which provide a greater number of steps for regulation, are predominant in eukaryotes (Robinson et al., 2000). 
1.4.1	Histidine kinase signalling in cyanobacteria
The cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 contains a total of 47 genes for Hiks and 45 genes for RR on its chromosome and plasmids (Kaneko et al, 1996; Mizuno et al., 1996; Kaneko et al., 2003; Los et al., 2008). There are 44 genes for Hiks on the chromosome and two and one gene on the plasmids pSYSX and pSYSM, respectively (Murata & Suzuki, 2005). The 44 genes for Hiks on the chromosome were named hik1 through hik44. Among them, the three putative Hiks, Hik11, Hik17 and Hik37 are supposed to be inactive as histidine kinases because they lack the conserved histidine residue in the Hik domain (Murata & Suzuki, 2006). The genes for the Hiks on the plasmids were designated hik45-hik47. Likewise, the 42 genes for RRs on the chromosome were designated rr1 through rr42, while rr43-rr45 are located on the plasmids. 
In Synechocystis, all putative hik genes were inactivated by insertion of a spectinomycin-resistance gene cassette in order to create a gene-knockout library (Suzuki et al., 2000). The characterisation of these knockout mutants led to the identification of histidine kinases involved in sensing environmental stimuli, including high light, cold and oxidative stress (Hik33), heat (Hik34), salt stress and hyperosmotic stress (Hik33, Hik34, Hik2, Hik41, Hik16 and Hik10), and phosphate limitation (Hik7) (Hirani et al., 2001; Mikami et al., 2002; Hsiao et al., 2004; Paithoonrangsarid et al., 2004; Shoumskaya et al., 2005; Suzuki et al., 2005; Kanesaki et al., 2007), thereby indicating that a single histidine kinase may respond to more than one stimulus and that multiple histidine kinases may respond to any specific environmental cue (Summerfield et al., 2011). 
One of these histidine kinases, Hik12, encodes a hybrid histidine kinase and a cognate RR (Cyanobase, 2011), which displays structural homologies to the Arabidopsis cytokinin receptors AHK2, AHK3 and AHK4, thereby suggesting a putative role for Hik12 as cyanobacterial cytokinin receptor. In addition to the structural homologies, Hik12 possesses a threonine residue within its extracellular membrane associated sensor (MASE) domain, which is conserved in all three Arabidopsis cytokinin receptors and was found to be one of the five amino acid positions within the CHASE domain of AHK4, relevant for cytokinin binding (Heyl et al., 2007). First evidence of cyanobacteria responding to cytokinin was observed by Selivankina et al., (2006) who could demonstrate that trans-zeatin affects the transcriptional activity in Synechocystis leading to the conclusion that cyanobacteria possess the molecular targets for cytokinin signal recognition. During the evolution of the chloroplast, many genes in plant nuclear genomes are thought to have been transferred from the chromosomes of the cyanobacterial symbionts (Wuichet & Zhulin, 2010). Hence, in plants, the cytokinin signalling system might also be an inheritage of the cyanobacterial ancestors. 
1.4.2	Cytokinin signalling in plants
In Arabidopsis thaliana, two-component elements are encoded by multigene families (Schaller et al., 2002; Heyl & Schmülling, 2003; Kakimoto, 2003; Ferreira & Kieber, 2005; Maxwell & Kieber, 2005), which fall into three major clades, phytochromes, ethylene receptors and cytokinin receptors (Schaller et al., 2008). The cytokinin receptor family in Arabidopsis consists of three histidine kinases, AHK2, AHK3 and AHK4 (Inoue et al., 2001; Suzuki et al., 2001; Ueguchi et al., 2001; Yamada et al., 2001). AHK4, which is also known as WOL1 or CRE1, was originally identified in two independent screens for woodenleg (wol) mutants with short roots in Arabidopsis (Mähönen et al., 2000) and for cytokinin response (cre) mutants that were defective in cytokinin induction of shoots in tissue culture (Inoue et al., 2001). Different studies have shown that AHK4 and also its paralogs AHK2 and AHK3 act as cytokinin sensors and are capable of mediating cytokinin-dependent histidine kinase activity in heterologous bacterial and yeast systems (Inoue et al., 2001; Suzuki et al., 2001; Ueguchi et al., 2001; Yamada et al., 2001). 
The cytokinin receptors AHK2, AHK3 and AHK4 are hybrid Hiks and display a common primary structure consisting of an extracytosolic cyclase/histidine kinase associated sensory extracellular (CHASE) domain which binds cytokinin (Anantharaman & Aravind, 2001; Heyl et al., 2007) and two flanking N-terminal transmembrane domains, which are followed towards the C-terminus by a Hik and an RR domain in the predicted cytosolic part (Heyl & Schmülling, 2003; Wulfetange et al., 2011). Functional evidence for cytokinin binding to the CHASE domain was obtained in in vivo binding assays (Romanov et al., 2005; Heyl et al., 2007). In addition, four amino acid positions within the CHASE domain of AHK4 have been identified that are relevant for cytokinin binding (Heyl et al., 2007). Furthermore, it was proposed that plants might have acquired the CHASE domain via lateral transfer through their chloroplasts, which have a cyanobacterial ancestry (Anantharaman & Aravind, 2001; Mougel & Zhulin, 2001). 
Cytokinin binding to the CHASE domain triggers autophosphorylation of the Hik at a conserved His residue. The phosphoryl group is subsequently transferred from the Hik to a conserved Asp residue in the receptor’s receiver domain. The C-terminal receiver domains of all three receptors interact redundantly with histidine phosphotransfer proteins (AHPs), which transmit the signal from the plasmamembrane to the nucleus (Hwang & Sheen, 2001; Punwani et al., 2010), where the phosphoryl group is transferred to a conserved Asp residue in the receiver domain of an RR protein (Müller & Sheen, 2007) resulting in the activation of the RR protein. In Arabidopsis, there are two types of RRs: type-A and type-B ARRs. Both possess a conserved receiver domain at their N-terminus, but their C-terminal domains diverge and their functions are opposite (Müller & Sheen, 2007). Type-B ARRs bind to DNA and function as transcriptional activators of cytokinin response genes, of which the type-A ARR genes form one group (Heyl et al., 2006; Müller & Sheen, 2007; To & Kieber, 2008). The genes for the A-type ARRs are direct targets of the type-B ARRs (Hwang & Sheen, 2001; Sakai et al., 2001) and as a result are strongly and rapidly induced in response to cytokinin. Thus, type-A ARRs have been implicated in mediating downstream processes including negative feedback regulation of cytokinin signalling (Hwang et al., 2002; Heyl & Schmülling, 2003; Kakimoto, 2003; Mizuno, 2004; To et al., 2004; Ferreira & Kieber, 2007). 
In Arabidopsis, the genes encoding the cytokinin receptors have been found to be expressed in almost all tissues, although with different abundance (Riefler et al., 2006). AHK4 is predominantly expressed in the root, while AHK2 and especially AHK3 transcripts are more abundant in the aerial parts of Arabidopsis plants (Ueguchi et al., 2001; Higuchi et al., 2004; Nishimura et al., 2004). Promoter:β-glucuronidase (GUS) fusions revealed that the receptor genes have overlapping expression domains and are transcribed in almost all cells in the different organs although with different strength (Nishimura et al., 2004). Analyses of T-DNA insertional mutations in AHK2, AHK3 and AHK4 have shown that there is a considerable degree of redundancy of these three receptors (Higuchi et al., 2004; Nishimura et al., 2004; Riefler et al., 2006). Loss-of-function mutation of single receptors displayed no or only minor effects on most of the phenotypes studied, while triple ahk2,3,4 mutants displayed near complete insensitivity to cytokinins and severe developmental defects, indicating a key regulatory role of cytokinins in plant growth and development (Higuchi et al., 2004; Nishimura et al., 2004; Riefler et al., 2006; To et al., 2007). However, individual receptors were shown to possess distinct functions and to mediate specific cytokinin activities. These functions include a role for AHK4 in regulating the sensitivity to cytokinin in root elongation (Inoue et al., 2001; Riefler et al., 2006) and a major role for AHK3 (together with AHK2) in regulating leaf senescence (Kim et al., 2006; Riefler et al., 2006). Furthermore, AHK3 appears to be the main regulator of cell differentiation in the transition zone of the root meristem (Dello Ioio et al., 2007), while AHK4 regulates embryonic root patterning (Mähönen et al., 2000; Müller & Sheen, 2007), the phosphate starvation response (Franco-Zorrilla et al., 2002, 2005) and sulphate assimilation (Maruyama-Nakashita et al., 2004). For AHK2, no specific function has been assigned so far, although AHK2 alone was shown to be sufficient to maintain normal plant growth under standard growth conditions (Higuchi et al., 2004; Nishimura et al., 2004; Riefler et al., 2006).
1.5	Cytokinin function in plants
Cytokinins are a class of plant hormones that were discovered more than 50 years ago, based on their ability to strongly stimulate growth and cell division in tobacco tissue culture (Miller et al., 1955; Amasino, 1955). Cytokinins are involved in numerous developmental and physiological processes, including cell division, shoot meristem initiation, leaf and root differentiation, chloroplast biogenesis, stress tolerance, delay of senescence and also in pathogen resistance (Mok & Mok, 2001; Hwang et al., 2002; Heyl & Schmülling, 2003; Mizuno, 2004; Ferreira & Kieber, 2006; Walter & McRoberts, 2006). 
Cytokinins are also known to interact with other plant hormones, including gibberellic acid, brassinosteroids, ethylene and abscisic acid, in order to control essential developmental processes in plants. These interactions can include the reciprocal control of hormone biosynthesis, the expression of components in other signal transduction pathways, and crosstalk of signal transduction intermediates directly downstream of the receptors (Bishopp et al., 2006). Plant hormone signalling is an area of intense investigation. Although considerable progress has been made, this complex signalling network still remains not fully understood. In this thesis, the role of cytokinin in plant defense reactions was of particular interest. 
1.5.1	Occurrence and homeostasis
Cytokinins consist of a large array of natural adenine derivatives, which can either be produced by plants and some bacteria through specific enzymatic pathways and degradation of nucleic acids or can be artificially generated by chemical synthesis (Mok & Mok, 2001; Sakakibara, 2006; Miyawaki et al., 2006). Naturally occurring cytokinins are either isoprenoid or aromatic cytokinins depending on the configuration of their N6-side chain as (Mok & Mok, 2001). Isoprenoid cytokinins occur more often and in greater abundance in plants than aromatic cytokinins (Sakakibara, 2006). Common natural isoprenoid cytokinins are N6-(Δ2-isopentenyl)-adenine (iP), trans-zeatin, cis-zeatin and dihydrozeatin. The major derivatives are usually trans-zeatin, iP and their sugar conjugates, whereas their distinct abundancy varies depending on plant species, tissue, and developmental stage. 
Cytokinin homeostasis in cells is regulated by the rate of de novo synthesis, the rate of import, the rate of synthesis and breakdown of cytokinin conjugates and finally the rate of export and breakdown (Mok & Mok, 2001; Schmülling et al., 2003). Key enzymes for cytokinins homeostasis are adenosine phosphate-isopentenyltransferases (IPT) and cytokinin oxidase/ dehydrogenases (CKX), which involved in cytokinin synthesis and degradation, respectively (Sakakibara, 2006). 
1.5.2	Cytokinin function in defense reactions
A further function of cytokinin has been suggested that directly links cytokinin effects and plant responses to biotrophic pathogens, due to a striking similarity between several well-established cytokinin functions and changes in host physiology during plant-pathogen interactions (Walters & McRoberts, 2006; Walters, 2008). Biotrophic fungal or bacterial pathogens utilize cytokinins to form green islands, which leads to delayed senescence and enhancement of sink activity (Walters & McRoberts, 2006; Walters, 2008; Choi et al., 2010b). It has been assumed that the cytokinin-mediated growth response suppresses plant basal defense mechanisms (Robert-Seilaniantz et al., 2007). However, recent research revealed that plant-originated cytokinins increase plant immunity together with salicylic acid (SA) signalling (Choi et al., 2010a). In Arabidopsis, the cytokinin receptors and in particular AHK3, are able to recognise both plant- and pathogen-derived cytokinins, but elicit different outputs, either the activation of a defense response or the development of pathogenic symptoms (Pertry et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2010a). Although cytokinins are known to affect plant responses to various pathogens, the molecular mechanisms underlying the distinct actions of plant- and pathogen-derived cytokinins in plant responses are not fully understood yet. Taken together, cytokinins are involved in a variety of plant developmental and physiological processes. In particular, cytokinins have also emerged as major factors in plant-pathogen interactions, where they play an essential role in maintaining plant health by simultaneously enhancing cell division activity and resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses (Choi et al., 2010b). Recent findings on the molecular mechanisms underlying the cytokinin-mediated signal transduction network in plants contribute to the understanding of the cytokinin function. Nevertheless, a thorough understanding of cytokinin receptor function is at an early stage. 
1.6	Objectives 
The ability to perceive environmental changes and to respond by adapting appropriately is critically important for the survival and successful competition of all living organisms, which turns signal transduction processes into a valuable topic for basic research. Although considerable effort has been made in the past years to elucidate signal transduction processes and the underlying molecular mechanisms, a thorough understanding remains elusive. The first part of this study was aimed at contributing to the understanding of signalling processes by elucidating the function of two distinct signalling components, with a special focus on their effects on the metabolism. The first analysed signalling component is the phytochrome Cph2, which is involved in light perception, the second one is Hik12, a histidine kinase of so far indefinite function. For this purpose, knockout and overexpression mutants were used to analyse the function of the respective proteins in the cyanobacterial model organism Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. The mutants were analysed physiologically under distinct growth conditions, with particular interest in light/dark transitions and in the course of transition from motile to sessile forms of lifestyle. 
The second part of this study focused on the function of cytokinin in plant-pathogen interactions. During the evolution of the chloroplast, many genes in plant nuclear genomes have been transferred from cyanobacterial symbionts. In particular, genes coding for proteins involved in signal transduction systems are highly conserved among cyanobacteria and plants. Accordingly, the cyanobacterial histidine kinase Hik12 shows sequence homologies to the cytokinin receptor histidine kinases in Arabidopsis. Besides being involved in essential developmental and physiological processes, cytokinins have also emerged as main factors in plant-pathogen interactions. The aim of this study was to deepen the understanding of the function of cytokinin in regulating susceptibility or basal resistance in the interaction of pathogens with Arabidopsis and barley. Therefore, a loss-of function mutant of the Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor AHK3 and transiently transformed barley leaves, overexpressing cytokinin-degrading enzymes, were analysed in interaction with Pseudomonas syringae and powdery mildew, respectively. 
